---
layout: post
title: "Pairwise independence does not imply countable mutual independence"
author: "Jordan Bryan"
categories: journal
tags: [documentation,sample]
image: indep.jpg
---


Define a sequence of random variables indexed by \\(n\\) as follows:

1. Divide the unit interval into sub-intervals of size \\(1/3^n\\)

2. Let the random variable be equal to \\(1\\) if \\(\omega\\) falls within the "middle" third of each subinterval, and let it be equal to \\(0\\) otherwise

More formally, let

$$
X_n := \mathbf{1}_{B_n}
$$

where \\(B_n\\) is the event defined as

$$
B_n := \Bigg\{\omega : \omega \in \bigcup_{j = 1}^{3^{n-1}} \bigg( \frac{3(j-1)+1}{3^{n}}, \frac{3(j-1)+2}{3^{n}} \bigg] \Bigg\}
$$

Following this procedure, one gets an iid sequence of random variables

$$
\{X_n\} \overset{\text{iid}}{\sim} \text{Bernoulli}\Big(\frac{1}{3}\Big)
$$

Independence follows from the fact that

$$
\mathsf{P}\big[\cap_{i \in \mathcal{I}} B_i \big] = \prod_{i \in \mathcal{I}}\mathsf{P}\big[B_i \big]
$$

for any index set \\(\mathcal{I}\\). Identical distribution follows from the fact that

$$
\mathsf{P}[X_i = 1] = 1/3
$$

for each \\(i\\).

Mutual independence, however, is a delicate thing. A small deviation from the setup above can result in a sequence of random variables that are pairwise independent, but not mutually independent.

We can change the position of two of the events from the previous construction to create a sequence of pairwise independent, but not mutually independent, Bernoulli random variables.

Now define

$$
Y_n := \mathbf{1}_{A_n}
$$

where \\(A_n\\) is defined as follows:

For \\(n=1\\), divide the unit interval into \\(3\\) intervals of equal size and set

$$
\begin{aligned}
A_1 := (1/3,2/3]
\end{aligned}
$$

For \\(n = 2\\) and \\(n=3\\), define 

$$
\begin{aligned}
A_2 &:= (0,1/9] \cup (5/9,2/3] \cup (7/9,8/9] \\
A_3 &:= (1/9,2/9] \cup (1/3,4/9] \cup (7/9,8/9]
\end{aligned}
$$

For each \\(n > 3\\), divide the interval \\((0,1]\\) into \\(\frac{1}{3^{n-1}}\\) subintervals of equal size, and define \\(A_n\\) to be all \\(\omega\\) that fall within the middle third of each of these segments, as before.

The figure at the top of the page illustrates events \\(A_1, \dots, A_5\\) under this scheme. Intuitively, one can see that the events cannot be mutually independent because there is no place on the unit interval where all five colours overlap. Namely,

$$
\begin{aligned}
\mathsf{P}\big[\cap_{i=1}^n A_i \big] &= \mathsf{P}\big[\varnothing \big] = 0
\end{aligned}
$$

which is not equal to 

$$
\prod_{i=1}^n \mathsf{P}\big[A_i \big] = 1 / 3^n
$$

However, any set of more than three events \\( \\{ A_i \\} \\) that does not contain all three of \\(A_1, A_2, A_3\\) *will* be mutually independent. In this particular construction, it is only the three-way interaction of \\(A_1, A_2, A_3\\) that destroys the mutual independence of the full sequence.



